# Game Design Doc

*Note: This design doc contains plans for current and future builds, but it is incomplete.*

## Game Overview

### Game Concept
After having an office job for a few decades, you decide to start a new life, wandering around in forests and meadows.

### Genre
Open world, exploration

### Target Audience

### Game Flow Summary
- The player can walk left and right and jump and climb up and back down.
- He can not go underground, because there are no caves and terrain is immovable.
- The player can also warp to different "dimensions", which represent different areas of the world. Different areas are generated by inputting a different y value to the procedural generation algorithms.
<!-- How does the player move through the game.   Both through framing interface and the game itself. -->

### Look and Feel
<!-- What is the basic look and feel of the game?  What is the visual style? -->

## Gameplay and Mechanics

### Gameplay

#### Game Progression

#### Mission/challenge Structure

#### Puzzle Structure

#### Objectives

- **To win**: Gain a certain amount of experience, without dying.
<!-- What are the objectives of the game? -->

#### Play Flow
<!-- How does the game flow for the game player -->

### Mechanics

#### Physics
Earth physics

#### Movement in the game
A and D to move, space / W for jump (TODO sneak ...?)

#### Actions
- Everything the player can do is an action. There are object actions (which can only be used when holding a certain object), non-object actions (which can only be used when not holding an object) and object-independent actions (where it doesn't matter).
- All object actions can be found in [Objects](#Objects).
- List of non-object actions (the input keys can always change):
  - Pick up object (`N`)
  - Process / Weave (can't decide whether to make it universal or specific; TODO) (TODO)
- List of object-independent actions:
  - Move (`A` and `D` by default)
  - Jump (`Space`)
  - Eat (TODO)
<!-- Including whatever switches and buttons are used, interacting with objects, and what means of communication are used -->

#### Player
Numerical player attributes:
- *hunger*
  - Decreases with time.
  - Obtained by eating.
- *energy*
  - Used by warping, walking, jumping, and sprinting.
  - Obtained by sleeping.
- *health*
  - Decreases when player is out in acid rain and blizzards; away from fire when it's cold.
  - Obtained, time in healthy conditions, bandage item.
- *experience*
  - Used for winning the game.
  - Obtained by completing most actions.
- *mentality*
  - Can change the way the world looks and the way the player interacts with it as well.
    - Affects dreams?
  - Obtained by sleeping, meditating, interacting with certain things.

Other player attributes:
- *inventory*
  - Used for storing objects with player.
  - Has finite space (objects take up this space with inventory cost).
<!-- What are the rules to the game, both implicit and explicit.  This is the model of the universe that the game works under.  Think of it as a simulation of a world, how do all the pieces interact?  This actually can be a very large section. -->

#### Tiles
- Modeled after Earth
- Tiles:
  - **Terrain tiles**:
    - List:
      - *Grass*
      - *Dirt*
      - *Stone*
      - *Sand*
      - *Water*
    - Mechanics:
      - Indestructible, though certain terrain tiles can be transformed into other terrain tiles after terrain generation (such as grass -> dirt and dirt -> grass).
      - Blocking (cannot be walked through)

  - **Structure tiles**:
    - (List omitted; see [Structures](#Structures))
    - Mechanics:
      - Destructible
      - Not blocking (can be walked past; except water)

*Note: A tile is .25 meters long.*
<!-- How does the physical universe work? -->

#### Objects
- Definition:
  - *An object is any tangible thing that isn't in the form of a tile.*
- Properties:
  - Are affected by gravity (when in world)
  - Can be stored in the player's inventory or in the world.
  - Have no size/shape limitations (that tiles have).
  - Have an inventory cost.
  - Have zero, one or two actions associated with it. These actions can only be performed while holding the corresponding object.
- List:
  - String
    - Obtained:
      - Weave (grass)
    - Actions:
      - Primary: Assemble
  - Bucket
    - Obtained (TODO)
    - Actions:
      - Primary: Harvest
  - Map
    - Obtained (TODO)
    - Actions:
      - Primary: Warp
  - Corn
    - Obtained:
      - Harvest (corn plants)
    - Actions (none)
  - Kernels
    - Obtained:
      - Split
        - Corn
    - Actions:
      - Primary: Plant
  - Wood
    - Obtained:
      - Cutting down tree
    - Actions:
      - Primary: Build
  - Stick
    - Obtained:
      - Finding in forest
      - Cutting down tree
      - Split
        - Wood
    - Actions (none)
  - Rock
    - Obtained:
      - Finding in forest
    - Actions (none)
  - Flint
    - Obtained:
      - Search
        - Near water
    - Actions (none)
  - Sickle
    - Obtained:
      - Assemble
        - 1 stick
        - 2 flint
    - Actions:
      - Cut (grass)
  - Axe
    - Obtained:
      - Assemble
        - 1 stick
        - 1 flint
    - Actions:
      - Primary: Cut down (trees)
      - Secondary: Take apart
  - Hoe
    - Obtained:
      - Assemble
        - 1 stick
        - 1 flint
    - Actions:
      - Primary: Till
<!-- how to pick them up and move them -->

#### Structures
List:
- Grass
- Trees
  - Tree Model 0 (no types of trees for now, just this placeholder model)
- Corn

#### Combat
No combat *yet*
<!-- If there is combat or even conflict, how is this specifically modeled? -->

#### Economy
- Currency is experience.
  - Obtained by completing certain actions.
  - Used for winning the game.

#### Screen Flow
- Main screen
- Inventory screen
<!-- A graphical description of how each screen is related to every other and a description of the purpose of each screen. -->

### Game Options
<!-- What are the options and how do they affect game play and mechanics? -->

### Replaying and Saving

- Every game can be saved and loaded.
- A menu will contain a list of all saves.
- There is no limit to the number of saves.

### Cheats and Easter Eggs

## Story, Setting and Character  

### Story and Narrative
- Your office job has made you reach breaking point, so you decide that enough is enough and go out into the woods.
<!-- Includes back story, plot elements, game progression, and cut scenes.  Cut scenes descriptions include the actors, the setting, and the storyboard or script. -->

### Game World

#### General look and feel of world

- **Season**: Every game randomly selects a season, which is used for the entire game.
- **Biomes**: Biomes vary throughout the game world; they affect things like tile tint color, resources and weather.

#### Areas
<!-- Including the general description and physical characteristics as well as how it relates to the rest of the world (what levels use it, how it connects to other areas) -->

### Characters
<!-- Each character should include the back story, personality, appearance, animations, abilities, relevance to the story and relationship to other characters -->

## Levels

### Level

There is only one level, nature.

<!-- Each level should include a synopsis, the required introductory material (and how it is provided), the objectives, and the details of what happens in the level.  Depending on the game, this may include the physical description of the map, the critical path that the player needs to take, and what encounters are important or incidental. -->

### Training Level

The player has to learn as she goes, so there is no training level.

## Interface

### Visual System.
<!-- If you have a HUD, what is on it?  What menus are you displaying? What is the camera model? -->

### Control System
<!-- How does the game player control the game?   What are the specific commands? -->

### Audio, music, sound effects

### Help System

Only to help player understand how to interact with the world, but nothing more.

## Artificial Intelligence

Animals would be a cool feature, or some sort of NPC. [TODO]

### Opponent and Enemy AI
<!-- The active opponent that plays against the game player and therefore requires strategic decision making -->

### Non-combat and Friendly Characters

### Support AI -- Player and Collision Detection, Pathfinding

## Technical

### Target Hardware

### Development hardware and software, including Game Engine

### Network requirements

## Game Art

This is an open source and open asset project. If you don't feel comfortable making your asset contributions open, please open an issue or contact an admin on the Discord server, and we will reconsider the open asset aspect!

### Sprites

*The game will use a pixel art style. I'm thinking, each texel should be 4px by 4px.*

- Player
- Tiles (TODO)
- Structures (painted with tiles; TODO)
- Objects
<!-- Key assets, how they are being developed.  Intended style. -->
